---
layout: post
category: lessons
title: "Lesson 2: Main components of a computer"
tagline: "WTF is a CPU, RAM and opcodes"
tags : [intro, beginner]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Target audience

Everyone who understood the previous lesson.

You may want to skip this, if ...

* ... you already familiar with the basic principles of a modern day computer.
* ... you are already familiar with terms like CPU, RAM, ROM, opcodes, ...

What you need:

* Pen and pager in electronic or archaic form.
* Internet access for further reading.

Do not expect:

* A detailed instruction how to build a computer from scratch.
* If you are looking for a guide to build logic gates from transistors,
diodes and resistors, you might want to start here: [Digital Logic Gates Just Using Transistors](http://www.instructables.com/id/Digital-Logic-Gates-Just-Using-Transistors/)
* If you want to know how to build a (simple) CPU using logic gates, you might
want start here: [How to Build an 8-Bit Computer](http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-Build-an-8-Bit-Computer/)

# The basic terms and units first

In the previous lesson we talked a lot about the binary number system. A single binary
digit (i.e. __0__ or __1__) is usually called a __bit__, which is a portmanteau of
the former (i.e. __b__<del>inary dig</del>__it__). But its also safe to think of it as "a _bit_ of information",
since it is indeed the smallest unit of information available on a computer system.

As mentioned before, bits are usually transmitted in groups of 8, also called an octet
or - more commonly - a __byte__ (which is an intentional respelling of _bite_ to avoid confusion
    with a __bit__). With 8 bits a byte can contain any number from
    __0__ (0b00000000) to __255__ (0b11111111 or $2^8 - 1$).

For greater numbers 2 bytes may be combined to a group of 16 bits, which is also
called a __word__, _small integer_, _short integer_. A _word_ can contain any number
from __0__ to __65,535__ ($2^16 - 1$)

The next greatest unit is the combination of 2 words or 4 bytes or 32 bits, also called __doubleword__
or _integer_ - the latter might be ambiguous as in the early days of computer
science an _integer_ depended on the processor architecture and might have also
denoted a 16-bit number. A __doubleword__ can contain any number from __0__ to
__4,294,967,295__ ($2^32 - 1$). If you want to think in terms of population, a _doubleword_
is not big enough to count the people on earth, though still sufficient to
count the people in china.

An eventually there is the combination of 4 words or 8 bytes or 64 bits, also
called __quadword__ or _long integer_ or _long_ or _long long_ - again the latter might be
ambiguous and depend on the processor architecture. A __quadword__ may contain
any number between __0__ and __18,446,744,073,709,551,615__ ($2^64 - 1$).
Or - in terms of population - a __quadword__ is sufficient to count the
people of a billion of earths. Though its not big enough to count all cells of all
humans on earth (which is somewhere in the region of 37 trillion per human by the way).

Even though I already said _eventually_, there is one more, the _doublequadword_ or __octaword__ or
8 words or 16 byte or 128 bits. I am not writing down the range, it is enough to
say: An __octaword__ is big enough to count a the cells of all humans on 100 trillion
earths - and there would be still room for more. Even though modern day computers
can handle these numbers, they are so enormous that their practical use is limited.
Or simply put: Why waste resources if almost all of your human concerns can be
solved with a __quadword__? The only exception to this is cryptography, in which case 128 bit
is the lower range of numbers - we will address this in a later lesson.
In summary, the commonly used units are:

{:.table .table-bordered}
| Unit | Definition | Range |
| bit  |            | __0__ to __1__ |
| byte, octet | 8 bits | __0__ to __255__ |
| word, short integer | 16 bits | __0__ to __65,535__ |
| doubleword, integer | 32 bits | __0__ to __4,294,967,295__ |
| quadword, long integer | 64 bits | __0__ to __18,446,744,073,709,551,615__ |
| doublequadword, octaword | 128 bits | __0__ to $2^128 - 1$ |

# Units for memory

Every computer requires some means to store and retrieve information, or rather sequences bytes. It is
quite obvious, that units described in the previous section do not suffice for larger amounts of data -
128 bits might be contain extremely large numbers, but they are certainly not sufficient to store
the content of a a Tolstoi novel. Regardless of the concrete storage medium there are several well
established units to measure the amount of available memory.

First der is the __kilobyte__, which orginally - and still quite commonly - referres to 1,024 (or $2^10$)
bytes. As computers are build on binary numbers, it makes sense, to measure the amount of memory in
powers of two. On the other hand the prefix _kilo_ is well establisched in [SI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_System_of_Units)-Units
(like _kilometer_, _kilogram_, _kilowatt_ and so on) and usually mean 1,000. To clean this up, the
[IEC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEC_80000-13) eventually defined a __kilobyte__ (short _kB_) als 1000 byte and
a __kibibyte__ (short _KiB_) as 1,024 byte. This terminology ist still quite uncommon, but for
correctness we will continue to use this.

By the same argument there a __megabyte__ (short MB) means 1,000,000 byte and a __mebibyte__ (short MiB) 1,048,576 ($2^20$) bytes.
A __gigabyte__ (short GB) is 1,000,000,000 byte, a __gibibyte__ (short GiB) 1,073,741,824 ($2^30$) bytes and so on.
It might be somewhat silly to talk in _kibi_, _mibi_, _gibi_ etc., but if you want to be precise
that is the kind of baby talk you have to do.

In summary we end up with the following units to measure the amount of information storage:

{:.table .table-bordered}
| SI | IEC | Rough amount of information (if one character uses one byte) |
| 1 __kilobyte__ = 1 kB = $10^3$ byte | 1 __kibibyte__ = 1 KiB = $2^10$ byte | About 2-3 paragraphs of text, a bit less than a page in a novel |
| 1 __megabyte__ = 1 MB = $10^6$ byte | 1 __mibibyte__ = 1 MiB = $2^20$ byte | Between 800-900 pages, or about 2-4 books - depending on the author an genre |
| 1 __gigabyte__ = 1 GB = $10^9$ byte | 1 __gibibyte__ = 1 GiB = $2^30$ byte | Between 3000-4000 books |
| 1 __terrabyte__ = 1 TB = $10^12$ byte | 1 __tebibyte__ = 1 TiB = $2^40$ byte | About 3-4 million books |
| 1 __petabyte__ = 1 PB = $10^15$ byte | 1 __pebibyte__ = 1 PiB = $2^50$ byte | About 3-4 billion books or about 100 Library of Congresses |
| 1 __exabyte__ = 1 EB = $10^18$ byte | 1 __exbibyte__ = 1 EiB = $2^60$ byte | About 100,000 Library of Congresses |

Next would be _zettabyte_ and then _yottabyte_, but these are so enourmous that they do not have
any practical use at the moment - might be good to keep them in mind for the future though. To give you
an idea about the timeframe of development so far: The personal computers in the late 1970th started with
1-32 KiB, in 2015 we are already used to machines in the TiB region and super-computers touching the
EiB order of magnitude.

# Types of memory

Over the time many forms of computer memory have been invented, to some degree re-invented and in
several cases already abandoned. It is common to distinquish beween external and internal storage:
External storage is supposed ot be removed from the computer by the user and potentially attached to
a different computer, internal storage is build-in and not supposed to be removed from the computer.

Here is a short list in roughly temporal order:

* Printouts (external): One might not consider this at first, but a printed document is of course a storage medium that we are
using for several millenia already (sometimes also called _books_). In the early days of computers the
main problem was that this was a write-only storage medium (i.e. it was impossible for the computer to
  read the information again). With [OCR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_character_recognition),
  [Barcodes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barcode) and [QR-Codes](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/QR-Code)
  this has changed over time. So yes, printouts are a computer storage medium, though a quite pricy
  one with rather limited capacity.
  * As a demonstration there is the nice anecdote of the [PGPi sanning project](http://www.pgpi.org/pgpi/project/scanning/):
  As cryptographic software PGP was restricted by US-Export regulations, so its source code was
  printed, exported as 12 books (not limited by US-Export, but rather backed by freedom of speech)
  and re-scanned in a country without rediculous export limitations.
* [Punched cards](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punched_card)
[tapes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punched_tape) (external):
The most simple way - and to some degree - most permanent way to to store a bit is to punch a hole
into some sort of material. Actually this method of information storage was already used before the
age of computers in various mechanical constructs. Todays use of this method is very limited to
almost non-existent. On the other hand: If you want to store something for geological ages there
is probably no better way than to punch or drill holes into a material that is prooven to remain inert
for a very very long time ... let's say a rock.
* [Magnetic storage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_storage): When using a medium with magnetic
properties its possible to store a bit be magnetising or demagnetising a certain area. There are several
applications for this method:
  * [Magnetic tapes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_tape_data_storage) (external): Just like old audio or
video tapes. Since data can only be read or writtern sequentally this method was most commonly used for
data backup. [DAT/DDS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Data_Storage) or [DLT](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Linear_Tape)
are still in use, though are loosing importance since other media have become cheaper and more
reliable.
  * [Floopy disk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Floppy_disk) (external): In the 1970-1990th if was quite common to
  store data on a flexible, more or less small, transportable disk. This medium has now become almost non-existent.
  * [Hard disk drive (HDD or HD)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_disk_drive) (mostly internal storage,
    might be used as external storage as well):
  Similiar in concept to a floppy disk, just with a different, "hard" matherial and better protected from
  external environment (e.g. dust). Still a very common storage medium, though loosing importance.
* [Optical disks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optical_disc) (external): Bits are stored by changing the optical
properties in an area (e.g. create a dent, a hole or darken/lighten it) and scan it with a laser. Usually used in
a write once read multiple scenario. Commonly known applications: [CD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_Disc),
[DVD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DVD) and [BlueRay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blu-ray_Disc). Still
a very common storage medium, though loosing importance.
* [Semiconductor memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_memory): A very wide range of integrated circuits
(i.e. microchips) to store data, with different properties and applications:
  * [Read only memory (ROM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read-only_memory) (internal): A microchip that
  is able to store information for a long time without power source, but can only be
  read by the computer. Very early versions of his where programmed or _burned_ by actually burning
  paths inside the chip with sufficently high voltage (i.e. this variant could really be programmed just once).
  Later came [EPROMs (erasable, programmable ROM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EPROM), that could be programmed
  once and resetted by UV light, and even later [EEPROMs (electrical-erasable, programmable ROM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EEPROM)
  that could be erased electrically (though not by the computer itself in normal operation and
    only a limited times before it deterioates and becomes entirely unusable).
    This storage is still widely used to store the firmware or BIOS of a computer.
  * [Flash memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_memory): The next generation of EEPROMs, that
  can be programmed and earsed multiple times at higher speed and is still able to hold information without
  external power source. Even though flash memory still has the problem that it deterioates with use,
  it has become increasingly important in the recent years:
    * Replacement for ROM (internal): To allow firmware updates, flash memory has in most cases replaced
    the use for classical ROMs
    * [Compact flash cards](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/CompactFlash) (external): Most commonly used in digital cameras
    * [USB-Sticks](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB-Stick) (external): Have replaced floppy disks almost entirely
    * [Solid state drive (SSD)](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid-State-Drive) (internal as well as external):
    Is about to replace hard disks in most cases
  * [Random access memory (RAM)](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random-Access_Memory) (internal):
  A microchip that is able to store information for a limited amound of time and requires a
  power source to keep it (i.e. all information is lost on a power outage). One might raise the
  question "Why use such an unreiable storage medium in the first place?". The reason is in the
  name: The information can be read and written randomly at very high and constant speed with next
  to no deterioation of the medium itself. There are two main variants:
    * [Static RAM (SRAM)](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_random-access_memory): Stores information
    as long as there is a power source and offers extremely fast access times. In theory
    SRAM is the ideal non-permanent computer storage, unluckily it has a rather poor data-density and
    thereby only offers limited capacities at (comparably) high price. SRAMs are usually used as
    caches of buffers.
    * [Dynamic RPM (DRAM)](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_Random_Access_Memory): Arguably the most
    volatile way to store binary information. It looses information even with power source after a certain
    amount of time, its access times are usually slower than SRAM, but offers a much high data-density.
    DRAMs are a major part in almost any modern computer and usually
    reffered to a _main memory_. The information loss over time is countered by a constant refresh
    (i.e. read and re-write) of the stored information.

# The processor

At the core of each computer is the processor, also reffered to as CPU (central processing unit).
In modern computers the processor is a highly complex integrated circuit with a lot of functionality
this is quite confusing at first. Nevertheless here is a short summary of the main components
of a modern day processor:

* Multiple cores: In modern days it have become quite common, that a single processor chip contains
more than one core. Even though there are some technical difference each core can be seen as a CPU
in itself. In other words, a modern computer usually has multiple CPUs working together. From now
on we will concentrate on the internals of a single CPU first, the challenges of a multi-CPU system
will be addressed in a late lesson.
* Register set: To perfom any kind of operations, a processor needs a place to store binary values.
A processor register can be seen just like the display on a cash register or a pocket calculator just
that a processor has more of those. The number of and size of registers varies with each with each
processor architecture.
* An arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and floating point unit (FPU). These are the componets in a processor
that actually do calculations like additions, substractions etc. The ALU operates with integers and the
FPU (as the name suggests) with floating point numbers. We will concentrate on integers first, floating
point numbers will be addressed in a later lesson.
* A memory management unit (MMU): Modern computers have a huge amount of main memory, machines with
8 GiB RAM are quite common already and it is possible to assemble servers with 1 TiB RAM or more.
With so much room for data one requires a management with a supervisory board to promote the interests of
its shareholders ... just kidding. The main reason for the MMU is, that modern computers a are powerful
enough (in terms of memory size and processor performance) to run multiple processes at once (several
hundred actually). Usually these processes should not interfer with each other, i.e. should not be able
to access each other's memory, also they are not supposed to require the entire available memory. The
MMU enable the operating system to create a view to the main memory for each process.
* Caches: As described, the access to the main memory DRAM is comparably slow (in terms of raw processor speed).
To reduce the amount of interactions with the main memory, modern processor have buildin caches to store
frequently used data in very fast (but limited capacity) SRAM. In many processors there are even three layers of
caches, called L1-, L2- and L3-Cache with different timing and size.
* Some sort of I/O-Bus: This is usually highly dependent on the processor architectore and its chipset,
but in the end every CPU needs a way to communicate with the outside world. Note that - from the perpective of
the CPU - the outside world includes components like graphic-cards, harddisks, any kind of USB-device
like keyboard/mouse etc. This kind of communication is generally denoted as I/O (for input/output).

As stated before, this might be quite confusing at first, so we will keep our focus on the main
functionality of a processor from the programmers perspective in the following lessons.

# Exercises

* Find some more examples what you can count with bytes, word, double words or quad words.
* Find some more examples how much information you can store in a _kilobyte_, _megabyte_, _gigabyte_, _terrabyte_
