---
layout: post
category: lessons
title: "Lession 1: Let's talk about digits"
tagline: "WTF is binary, hex, octets ..."
tags : [intro, beginner]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Target audience

Everyone with basic mathematical knowledge.

You may want to skip this, If you already know what binary, octal and hexadecimal
encodings are, as there will be nothing new here.

# How to we count count? Actually!

Certainly everyone has learned counting and how to write down big numbers in
elementary school or even sooner.
So if I say something like "There are 3375612 people in this city" everyone
knows what I mean and already have a figure in mind. What usually happens is
that the statement above will be implicitly read as
"There are three million three hundred seventy five thousand six hundred twelve people in this city"
or - to be honest here - most people will just read it like
"There are three point three million something people in this city".

But what if I read it like this "There are __3__ __3__ __7__ __5__ __6__ __1__ __2__ people in the city"?
Well, that is a bit unfamiliar, sounds more like a phone number than a way
to count people. Actually, when read this way, it becomes much harder to get
a concrete figure of how many people there are. Nevertheless I would like encourage
everyone to read all the numbers on the page exactly like this from now on, i.e.
like phone number, just as a sequence of digits.

So what does a sequence of __3__ __3__ __7__ __5__ __6__ __1__ __2__ actually
mean. Well, obviously this is supposed to be the result of an addition like this:

$$
\begin{align*}
  \begin{array}{cr}
 & 3000000 \\
 + & 300000 \\
 + & 70000 \\
 + & 5000 \\
 + & 600 \\
 + & 10 \\
 + & 2
  \end{array}
\end{align*}
$$

or more in a somewhat more compact and structured way

$$
\begin{align*}
3 \cdot 10^6 + 3 \cdot 10^5 + 7 \cdot 10^4 + 5 \cdot 10^3 + 6 \cdot 10^2 + 1 \cdot 10^1 + 2 \cdot 10^0
\end{align*}
$$

So far there should not be anything new here, except maybe a very complicated
way to write down the obvious.

But why exactly are we using ten symbols (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9) to write down
numbers? Well, the most simple - and probably quite obvious - answer is:
Because we have ten fingers, duh!

Ok then, but what if by some evolutionary quirk we would have been just equipped
with eight fingers? Surely this would not have interfered with our capabilities as
tool-users that much. How would we write our numbers then?
(On a side note: This argument may also apply to people working
  for the yakuza or some illustrious guys with names like "Three finger Joe" or
  "Berek Halfhand" )
