---
layout: post
category: lessons
title: "Lesson 1: Let's talk about digits"
tagline: "WTF is binary, hex, octets ..."
tags : [intro, beginner]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Target audience

Everyone with basic mathematical knowledge.

You may want to skip this, if ...

* ... you already know what binary, octal and hexadecimal encodings are.

What you need:

* Pen and pager in electronic or archaic form.
* Internet access for further reading.

Do not expect:

* Anything deeply mathematical here.
* If you are interested in the theory and history of numeral systems, wikipedia
offers a good starting point for further reading: [Positional notation](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Positional_notation).

# How to we write down numbers? Actually!

Certainly everyone has learned counting and how to write down big numbers in
elementary school or sooner.
So if I state something like

> There are 3372493 people in this city.

everyone knows what I mean and already have a figure in mind (if this statement is right or wrong or
    by any feasible means verifiable is a different matter).

What usually happens is that the statement above will be implicitly read as
"There are three million three hundred seventy five thousand six hundred ninety three people in this city"
or - to be entirely honest here - most people will just read it like
"There are three point three million something people in this city".

But what if I read it like this:

> There are __3__ __3__ __7__ __2__ __4__ __9__ __3__ people in the city.

(i.e. digit by digit)

Well, that is a bit unfamiliar, sounds more like a phone number than a way to count people. Actually,
when read this way, it becomes much harder to get a concrete (or even rough) figure of how many people
there are in the city. Nevertheless I would like encourage everyone to read all the numbers on the page
exactly like this from now on, i.e. like phone number, just as a sequence of digits.

So what does the sequence __3__ __3__ __7__ __2__ __4__ __9__ __3__ actually
mean. Well, obviously this is supposed to be the result of an addition like this:

$$
  \begin{array}{cr}
 & 3000000 \\
 + & 300000 \\
 + & 70000 \\
 + & 2000 \\
 + & 400 \\
 + & 90 \\
 + & 3
  \end{array}
$$

or more in a somewhat more compact and structured way

$$
\begin{align*}
3 \cdot 10^6 + 3 \cdot 10^5 + 7 \cdot 10^4 + 2 \cdot 10^3 + 4 \cdot 10^2 + 9 \cdot 10^1 + 3 \cdot 10^0
\end{align*}
$$

So far there should not be anything new here, except maybe a very complicated
way to write down the obvious.

But why exactly are we using ten symbols (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9) to write down
numbers? Well, the most simple - and probably quite obvious - answer is:
Because we have ten fingers, duh!

Ok then, but what if - by some evolutionary twist - we would have been just equipped
with eight fingers? Surely this would not have interfered with our capabilities as
tool-users very much. How would we write our numbers then?
(On a side note: This argument may also apply to people working
  for the yakuza or some illustrious guys with names like "Three finger Joe" or
  "Berek Halfhand" )

Well, most likely we would have ended up with just eight symbols (0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7)
to write down our numbers and never have even invented the symbols __8__ and __9__.
So in this hypothetical world I would have said:

> There are 14672715 people in the city.

Which we can verify, by doing the same kind of calculation, just in context of
a world of 8 fingered people:

$$
\begin{align*}
1 \cdot 8^7 + 4 \cdot 8^6 + 6 \cdot 8^5 + 7 \cdot 8^4 + 2 \cdot 8^3 + 7 \cdot 8^2 + 1 \cdot 8^1 + 5 \cdot 8^0
\end{align*}
$$

Which is - if you care to do the math - indeed the same number of people in the city.

Now we can continue this little thought-experiment: What would an alien like
E.T. or Paul say? (I.e. just with three fingers on each hand - albeit very long ones.)

By the same argument as above, these aliens would most likely just use
six symbols (0 1 2 3 4 5) and never have invented __6__, __7__, __8__ or __9__.
So they would say

> There are 200141221 people in the city.

 Because

 $$
 \begin{align*}
 2 \cdot 6^8 + 0 \cdot 6^7 + 0 \cdot 6^6 + 1 \cdot 6^5 + 4 \cdot 6^4 + 1 \cdot 6^3 + 2 \cdot 6^2 + 2 \cdot 6^1 + 1 \cdot 6^0
 \end{align*}
 $$

is again the same number of people.

Obviously there is a pattern here. In the examples above 3372493, 14672715 and 200141221
are all representations of the same number, just depending on the type of
creature who writes it down. The mathematical term for this is *term* or *radix*.
So 3372493 is the number of people in base-10 (aka decimal), 14701111 in base-8
(aka. octal) and 200141221 in base-6 (not writing down the alternative name for
  this one for obvious reasons).

# Why is the of any use?

Lets face it, at first sight the invention of a new number system is more
confusing than helpful. Just by looking at a sequence of digits like 200141221, one
implicitly assumes a base-10 (decimal) number systems and gets the wrong information.
To be precise one would also have to write down the used number system behind or
before each series of digits. So why bother? Is decimal not good enough?

Allow me to continue the above thought-experiment just one more time: What if
there are only two fingers? (Or - for some obscure reason - we have decided just to
  use our thumbs for counting.)

By the same logic as above we would use use two symbols (0 1) and have never
invented all the rest. Nevertheless we could still say

> There are 1100110111010111001101 people in the city

In which case the calculation would look like this

$$
 \begin{align*}
 1 \cdot 2^21 + 1 \cdot 2^20 + 0 \cdot 2^19 + 0 \cdot 2^18 + 1 \cdot 2^17 + 1 \cdot 2^16 \\
 + 0 \cdot 2^15 + 1 \cdot 2^14 + 1 \cdot 2^13 + 1 \cdot 2^12 + 0 \cdot 2^11 + 1 \cdot 2^10 \\
 + 0 \cdot 2^9 + 1 \cdot 2^8 + 1 \cdot 2^7 + 1 \cdot 2^6 + 0 \cdot 2^5 + 0 \cdot 2^4 \\
 + 1 \cdot 2^3 + 1 \cdot 2^2 + 0 \cdot 2^1 + 1 \cdot 2^0
 \end{align*}
$$

Which is still the same number of people as before, just in base-2 (aka. binary).

Even though this is might look quite long, unintuitive and thereby confusing,
this is indeed a very useful representation of a number, as it allows us to
transmit any number just by using any form of on (1) and off (0) signals.

Obviously a series of on/off signals is far more resistant to noise than any
other method of communication. This applies to sending information through a
wire across the atlantic as well as within an electric circuitry.
Therefore base-2 (binary) is the natural way to write down numbers when
building a computer.

# Some conventions and one more

As noted before, writing down a sequence of digits becomes confusing, when it is
not clear which number base was used. So from now on: If nothing else is
stated we mean the usualy base-10 (decimal) system. I.e. 3372493 is still
three million three hundred seventy five thousand six hundred eighty nine.

There are two commonly used ways to denote base-2 (binary) numbers, either by
appending a *b* or *B* or prefixing it with *0b*. From now on we will use the
latter convention. I.e. 0b1100110111010111001101 is binary for
three million three hundred seventy five thousand six hundred eighty nine.

In this example it already becomes clear, that binary number quickly become quite
long and cumbersome to deal with. To shorten this a bit, the base-8 (octal) system
is actually of some use, since it is possible to to combine three binary digits to
a single octal digit:

$$
  \begin{array}{ccc}
  0 & = & 0b000 \\
  1 & = & 0b001 \\
  2 & = & 0b010 \\
  3 & = & 0b011 \\
  4 & = & 0b100 \\
  5 & = & 0b101 \\
  6 & = & 0b110 \\
  7 & = & 0b111
  \end{array}
$$

The most commonly used way to denote octal numbers is by prefixing it with a _0_.
So 014672715 is base-8 (octal) for
three million three hundred seventy five thousand six hundred eighty nine.
Since this might be overlooked very easily, e we will not use this convention very
often and always clearly state if a number is supposed to be read in octal.

The reason why octal is not used very often is, because in modern computers binary
digits are usually transmitted in groups of 8 (aka an octet or byte). I.e. the
the smallest chunk of information a computer transmits is a number between
0b00000000 = 0 and 0b11111111 = 255. Unluckily 8 is not dividable by 3, so octal
numbers do not match very well in this scenario.

On the other hand a base-16 (hexadecimal) system is extremely helpful. In the
thought-experiment from earlier this would mean an alien with eight fingers
on each hand (or some kind of double-spider horror monster - lets not dwell on
  that). In short, we need 16 symbols to write down our numbers, as we are used
  to 10 we fill up the remaining 6 with letters:
  __0__ __1__ __2__ __3__ __4__ __5__ __6__ __7__ __8__ __9__ __a__ __b__ __c__ __d__ __e__ __f__

When handling binary this becomes useful as a 4 binary digits can be reduced to a single
hexadecimal digit:

$$
  \begin{array}{ccc}
  0 & = & 0b0000 \\
  1 & = & 0b0001 \\
  2 & = & 0b0010 \\
  3 & = & 0b0011 \\
  4 & = & 0b0100 \\
  5 & = & 0b0101 \\
  6 & = & 0b0110 \\
  7 & = & 0b0111 \\
  8 & = & 0b1000 \\
  9 & = & 0b1001 \\
  a & = & 0b1010 \\
  b & = & 0b1011 \\
  c & = & 0b1100 \\
  d & = & 0b1101 \\
  e & = & 0b1110 \\
  f & = & 0b1111
  \end{array}
$$

Or in other way round: Any octet (byte) in a computer system can be written down
by two hexadecimal digits.

There are two commonly used ways to denote hexadecimal numbers, either by appending
a _h_ or _H_ or by prefixing it with _0x_. From now on we will use the latter
convention, so to complete our ongoing example:

> There are 0x3375cd people in the city.

or as calculation

$$
\begin{align*}
3 \cdot 16^5 + 3 \cdot 16^4 + 7 \cdot 16^3 + 5 \cdot 16^2 + c \cdot 16^1 + d \cdot 16^0 \\
c = 12 \\ c = 13
\end{align*}
$$

# Exercises

* Calculate the decimal number for 0x85
* Calculate the decimal number for 0b10111
* Calculate the binary, octal and hexadecimal representation of 171
